Hello again.
In this video, we are going to start looking at how to work with multiple threads.
I've got some code here which is going to start up a thread which prints out a message.
There we are, "hello from thread"
If I want to launch some more threads, then I just create some more instances.
And of course, to join on them,
I am going to add an argument to each thread so I can see which thread is printing out the message.
So there we are, launching multiple threads is pretty straightforward, but understanding how they
interact with each other when they run can be more involved. For the moment.
I am going to "dodge" these problems.
I am going to add a sleep to each thread, so the threads are going to sleep for different intervals of
times.
So that one thread does not wake up until the previous thread has finished.
So thread one is going to run first then exit, then thread two will wake up and run.
Then thread three will wake up and run. I am going to use the sleep_for function for this_thread.
And then an interval of one second. I have got to write this out in full, because the suffix only works
with literals and "num" is a variable.
So let's see if that works.
Yes! thread 1, thread 2, thread 3.
So these threads are all launched, then the first thread will sleep for one second print its message and
exit. Then the second thread will sleep for two seconds - or one more second rather  - then that will wake
up and print its message.
Then the third thread will sleep for another second and then that'll wake up
and print its message.
OK, so what is the source of these complications with multiple threads? The kernel has a scheduler
which controls when and how threads execute, just as it has one for how processes execute. The scheduler
will allocate threads between cores so each thread will run on a core.
The scheduler will also perform task switching between threads. And if there are more threads than there
are cores available, then that is inevitable.
The scheduler is allowed to interrupt a thread and allow another thread to run on that core.
So basically this means we cannot make any assumptions about when threads run.
You cannot even assume what order they start in.
In the example, I put in some sleeps to make the threads appear to run in the same order as they were
in the source code, but it is quite possible that these threads could actually start up in a completely different
order.
A thread can be interrupted at any time and a thread can be restarted at any time.
So I chose a very long time out - one second - to make sure that the task switching would not have any effect,
Of course, in the real world, you would not want to have things waiting for one second.
So a thread can be interrupted and restarted at any time, and while a thread is inactive due to waiting,
sleeping or being interrupted, another thread can run.
This could execute the same code instructions as the inactive thread.
It could also access data which is shared with the inactive thread.
So it could look something like this, in a very crude diagram. If we take all the sleeps out of our program,
we might have that t2 starts first, because the threats can start in any order, then it runs some of its code,
then it will be interrupted.
Then t1 starts and runs some of its code while t2 is inactive.
Then t3 starts up and t1 and t2 are inactive.
Then t3 gets interrupted, t1 gets to run some more of its code and then t2 can get to run.
So you can see you have this effect where t2 is executing, but t1 and t3 appear to be executing while
it's running and similarly, t1 is running, but t3 appears to be executing in the middle of its execution.
So threads can execute in between each other or, to use the technical term, interleave.
So I mentioned that threads can share data and this is quite a common technique for threads to communicate
or exchange data with each other.
The only requirement is that the data must be visible in all the thread functions that need to share it
And that is obvious really, because each execution thread has its own execution stack.
And if there is data which is private to that function, then it is going to be on the function's private
stack and it will not be visible by any other thread, including the main thread.
If we are using global functions as our thread functions, then the shared data needs to be global or
static variables.
If we have class member functions which are executed as threads, then any member of that class will
be shared between the member function threads.
The problem comes when we have this interleaved execution, interacting with shared data. So we can have
situations where a thread writes some values to shared data.
Then it gets interrupted.
Then another thread overwrites the values in that data.
And then when the first thread wakes up, the value of that data will have changed without the thread
knowing about it.
You can even get situations where data contains a mixture of values from two different threads.
So the interleaved execution was also an interleaved write.
And trying to keep your [shared] data in a coherent state is one of the biggest problems, maybe the biggest
problem in concurrency.
A term that you often hear in talks about multi-threading is the data race. C++ defines very precisely
what is meant by a data race.
It can occur when we have the kind of conflicting access that we are talking about. If we have two or
more threads accessing the same memory location.
And at least one of the threads is modifying the memory location.
These accesses are safe, provided there is some kind of synchronization of accesses.
I did this in a very crude way in the example, by putting sleeps to make sure that each thread
accesses the output in turn.
So one solution is to make each access "happen before" the next.
The other solution is to make the access atomic, which means it is a single operation which cannot be
interrupted. If neither of these conditions are met, a data race occurs.
If neither of these conditions are met, then a data race occurs. [This cannot be repeated enough!!]
The program has undefined behaviour and it is not guaranteed to behave consistently.
C++ also defines what it means by a memory location.
This is a scalar object, or a scalar part of an object. A scalar object is a simple object as opposed
to a compound object such as an array or a struct.
So this could be a variable of built in type, a pointer, or an element in a container, or a struct or
class member, which is a scalar object.
Of course, being C++, there are some obscure edge cases. There are things called bitfields which are designed
for use with hardware where the value of individual bits is significant.
Bit fields allow you to create variables which represent groups of bits within an integer so we can
do something like this, which is bfb is the first nine bits of an int, and bfe is the last
23 bits.
The compiler is allowed to optimize for space by putting these into a single int, so that counts as
a single memory location.
And then even more obscure - don't ask me why! - you can create a bitfield of zero length.
So we have bfb as the first nine bits, then we have this
bfs variable, which corresponds to no bits at all.
Then we have our bfe variable.
If you have this zero length bitfield, then the compiler cannot do the optimization, and that actually
is two separate memory locations. I am sure you are going to be using that all the time!
When it comes to compound objects, C++ does not place any restrictions on classes that we write, or structs.
So we could create objects which are internally synchronized.
And threads can just use them without any external synchronization.
These are going to be less efficient than single threaded versions due to the overhead from synchronization.
So if we run these in a single-threaded program or in a situation where there is not a data race, then we are creating
unnecessary overhead.
There's also the danger that programmers might see this shared object, which does not appear to be synchronized.
So they add some synchronization just to make sure.
And that is not just inefficient, it can actually cause more serious problems.
When it comes to the standard containers from the C++ library, these are classed as memory locations.
So if there are multiple threads accessing the same container object and one or more is modifying,
then there is a potential data race and the user - that's me and you - must add synchronization.
However, if the accesses are to different objects of the same type, or objects of different types, then there is
no need for synchronization.
The result of this is that library containers are just as efficient in multithreaded programs as they are
in single-threaded programs.
The only exception is if there is a data race, in which case you need to add synchronization.
This also means that the C++ standard and C++ compiler developers do not need to provide two different
versions of the library - one for multithreaded, one for single threaded.
The advice I would give is to make our own types behave like standard library classes, which is the advice
I always give.
If you have different sets of rules, depending on who wrote the code, it makes life much more difficult.
If we have classes that behave exactly like the built-in types or standard library classes that we can just carry
on using the same assumptions that we do everywhere else.
Another term that you will often hear when talking about multi-threading is "race condition". This usually means
that there are two or more threads trying to do something and the outcome will differ depending on which
thread gets there first.
So the outcome of the program execution will depend on how the threads are scheduled to run.
If we go back to our example and take the sleeps out,
it is possible that threat two to could get to print its ID before thread one does.
And then we could run the program again and the scheduling might be different and we might see that
thread one prints its message first.
So depending on which thread gets to run first and complete, we get a different message printed.
Obviously, this is just a little demonstration.
I mean, it does not matter. But in a real world program race conditions are horrible, a real nightmare.
In fact, the data race - or at least the data race defined by C++ - is a special case of a more general race
condition.
So depending on how the threads are scheduled, you may or may not get interfering writes and data
corruption.
OK, so that's it for this video and in the next video, I will give you some examples of these problems.
Until then, keep coding!